IBX-10684: Document translation management (#3249)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/multisite/translations_management/extend_translations_management.md

The `isExcluded()` method receives a [`ContentInfo`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-ContentInfo.html) object, which gives you access to different criteria, including content type, section, owner, main language, publication status, visibility, and main location of the content item.
If the content item should be excluded, the method should return `true`.

``` php
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/src/TranslationsManagement/MyCustomExclusionRule.php') =]]
```

Register the rule with the `ibexa.translations_management.side_by_side.exclusion_rule` tag.
This interface is not registered for [Symfony autoconfiguration]([[= symfony_doc =]]/service_container.html#the-autoconfigure-option), so the tag is required.

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 1, 1) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 15, 23) =]]
```

### Exclude with existing class

`MyCustomExclusionRule` targets one specific content type by name.

> To exclude any content type that contains specific field types without the need to write a custom class, register an additional instance of the built-in [`UnsupportedFieldTypeExclusionRule`](https://github.com/ibexa/translations-management/blob/main/src/lib/SideBySide/Service/UnsupportedFieldTypeExclusionRule.php).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To exclude any content type that contains specific field types without the need to write a custom class, register an additional instance of the built-in `Ibexa\TranslationsManagement\SideBySide\Service\UnsupportedFieldTypeExclusionRule` service.
```
This is a private repo, the link won't work for the readers

Use an arbitrary string ID instead to avoid overwriting the package's own registration:

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 1, 1) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 21, 26) =]]
```

## Use Twig component extension points

Two Twig component groups allow you to inject custom UI elements into the translation interface without the need to override their templates.
Such custom elements could be:

- buttons that allow the editor to create a new translation either in the side-by-side view or the standard single-panel editor
- a disclaimer or policy notice that the editor must acknowledge before a translation is created

| Component group | Location | Variables available |
|---|---|---|
| `admin-ui-content-translation-modal-footer` | Footer of the **Add translation** modal | `form`, `content_id`, `location`, `allow_placeholder` |
| `admin-ui-content-edit-translation-select-footer` | Footer of the **Select translation** panel on the content edit screen | `form`, `content_id`, `main_language_code` |

> Both groups follow the same pattern: if any component renders a non-empty output into the group, the default footer buttons are replaced entirely by the component output.

Reviewer 2: This description is too broad for the two `side-by-side footer` extension points. `admin-ui-content-translation-modal-footer` does replace the default footer when it renders non-empty output, but `admin-ui-content-edit-translation-select-footer` is only appended between the built-in Edit and Discard buttons. Could we document these two groups separately so implementers do not expect the second one to replace the defaults?

---
description: Add custom classes, exclude custom content types and add support for custom fields.
edition: lts-update
month_change: true
---

# Extend translations management

By extending [Translations management](translations_management_guide.md), you can adapt the package's behavior to your specific requirements.
The package is designed to be extended in multiple ways.
You can create custom [translation providers](configure_translations_management.md#configure-translation-providers), field type transformers, exclusion rules, and UI components.
In all cases, you follow the same pattern: implement an interface first, then register the service with a service tag.
The package discovers and registers tagged services automatically.

## Add custom translation provider

Before you build a custom translation provider, if your provider uses the AI Actions framework, make sure that the `ibexa/connector-ai` package is configured in your system.

When building a custom translation provider you can rely on [`ConfigurableProviderInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Provider-ConfigurableProviderInterface.html).

> It extends `TranslationProviderInterface` and adds `getConfiguration()` and `isConfigured()` for providers that store API keys and other required settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
TranslationProviderInterface hasn't been mentioned yet, so I'd move this section to the one below (see the next comment for a suggestion).

### REST API-based provider

> To connect a translation service that calls a REST API directly, implement [`TranslationProviderInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Provider-TranslationProviderInterface.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To connect a translation service that calls a REST API directly, implement [`TranslationProviderInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Provider-TranslationProviderInterface.html).
For providers that store API keys and other required settings, you can rely on [`ConfigurableProviderInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Provider-ConfigurableProviderInterface.html).
It extends `TranslationProviderInterface` and adds `getConfiguration()` and `isConfigured()` methods.
```
(previous comment continued)

The `translate()` method receives a [`TranslationDataInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-TranslationDataInterface.html) object that carries the text to translate along with the source and target [language codes](configure_translations_management.md#advanced-translation-provider-options):

``` php hl_lines="36-49"
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/src/TranslationsManagement/MyCustomProvider.php') =]]
```

Register the provider with the `ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider` tag.

> Both `identifier` and [`validation_profile`](#validation-profiles) are required attributes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Both `identifier` and [`validation_profile`](#validation-profiles) attributes are required .
```

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 1, 6) =]]
```

### AI-based provider

To connect a translation service that uses the [AI Actions](ai_actions.md) framework, implement [`AiTranslationProviderInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Provider-AiTranslationProviderInterface.html).
This interface extends `ConfigurableProviderInterface`.

> It serves as a type marker for AI-based providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This interface extends `ConfigurableProviderInterface` and serves as a type marker for AI-based providers.
```

The interface adds `getConfiguration()` and `isConfigured()` to the base provider contract.

> These methods allow the package to determine whether the provider is available before it displays selectable options in the **Create a new translation** modal:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The system uses the `getConfiguration()` and `isConfigured()` methods to determine whether the provider is available before displaying selectable options in the **Create a new translation** modal:
```

Rewriting this because `AiTranslationProviderInterface` doesn't add any new methods, it's just a marker interface - we say above that it's `ConfigurableProviderInterface` who adds it.

``` php hl_lines="53 60"
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/src/TranslationsManagement/MyCustomAiProvider.php') =]]
```

Register the provider with the `ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider` tag, with `ai_generic` as the validation profile.

> The `ai_generic` validation profile is used by default for AI providers, but you can [implement your own](#validation-profiles).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ai_generic` validation profile is meant to be used by default for AI providers, but you can [implement your own](#validation-profiles).
```
"is used by default for AI providers" suggests that it's set by default, but it's not - it's a required property which you have to set.

The `validation_profile`, `supportedLanguageCodes`, and `languageCodesMap` options work the same way as for REST API-based providers.

### Language code normalizer

If your provider uses [language codes](configure_translations_management.md#advanced-translation-provider-options) that differ from the ones used by [[= product_name =]] and the `languageCodesMap` configuration is insufficient, implement a custom [`LanguageNormalizerInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Provider-LanguageNormalizer-LanguageNormalizerInterface.html) to handle the conversion:

``` php
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/src/TranslationsManagement/MyCustomLanguageCodeNormalizer.php') =]]
```

The `supports()` method is a way to bind the normalizer to a provider.
When a translation is triggered, the system checks the registered normalizers, and it uses the first one whose `supports()` method returns `true` for the current provider.

> Register the normalizer with the `ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider.language_normalizer` tag.

Reviewer 3: If the second sentence moved below the code.
```suggestion
Register the normalizer with the `ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider.language_normalizer` tag:
```

> If multiple normalizers are registered, use `priority` to control the order in which they are checked:

Reviewer 3: I'd move this sentence below the code.

> If multiple normalizers are registered, use `priority` to control the order in which they are checked:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If multiple normalizers are registered, use `priority` to control the order in which they're checked:
```

Field value transformers handle this encode/decode cycle, one per field type.
The package includes transformers for `text`, `RichText`, and `ibexa_landing_page` fields.

To add support for a custom or non-standard field type, implement [`FieldValueTransformerInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Transformer-Field-FieldValueTransformerInterface.html):

- `getFieldTypeIdentifier()` - returns the field type identifier that this transformer handles
- `encode(Field $field): EncodedFieldValue` - extracts the translatable string from the field and wraps it in an [`EncodedFieldValue`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Transformer-Field-EncodedFieldValue.html).
The constructor takes the extracted string as its first argument and an optional metadata array as the second.
- `decode(string $value, mixed $previousFieldValue, array $metadata): Value` - receives the translated string, the previous field value, and any metadata. Returns the updated field value.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The following example adds support for automatically translating the alternative text of an image:

```
(this code sample doesn't have any description)

```

Register the new transformer with the `ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.field_value_transformer` tag.
The `field_type_identifier` attribute is required.
It must match the value that `getFieldTypeIdentifier()` returns:

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 1, 1) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 11, 14) =]]
```

!!! note "Advanced metadata handling"

    When metadata is required for decoding or when you need to control what happens if metadata encoding fails, implement [`MetadataAwareFieldValueTransformerInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Transformer-Field-MetadataAwareFieldValueTransformerInterface.html).
    With this interface, you can fail the translation when metadata encoding fails and indicate that metadata is required for decoding.
    Without it, the field is skipped instead.

## Define custom exclusion rules

Use exclusion rules to identify content that cannot use the side-by-side view.

> The Translations management package ships with one rule that excludes content types that contain `ibexa_form`fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Translations management package ships with one rule that excludes content types that contain `'ibexa_landing_page` or `ibexa_form` fields.
```

Still excluded from side-by-side: https://github.com/ibexa/translations-management/blob/3f479520f2750b8dd8c7810efa459115da775059/src/bundle/Resources/config/services/side_by_side_translation.php#L113

> The Translations management package ships with one rule that excludes content types that contain `ibexa_form`fields.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Translations management package ships with one rule that excludes content types that contain `ibexa_form` fields.
```

> The `isExcluded()` method receives a [`ContentInfo`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-ContentInfo.html) object, which gives you access to different criteria, including content type, section, owner, main language, publication status, visibility, and main location of the content item.

Reviewer: At this point the interface was not mentioned yet, so it's not clear which `isExcldued` method is described. Let's merge this with the other mention below (see comment below)
```suggestion
```

### Exclude with custom class

To exclude additional content types, for example, content types whose fields render incorrectly in the side-by-side layout, implement [`SideBySideExclusionRuleInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-SideBySide-Service-SideBySideExclusionRuleInterface.html).

> The `isExcluded()` method receives a [`ContentInfo`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-ContentInfo.html) object and returns `true` if the content item should be excluded.

Reviewer: (cont.)

```suggestion
To exclude content from side-by-side view, for example, content types whose fields render incorrectly in the side-by-side layout, implement [`SideBySideExclusionRuleInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-SideBySide-Service-SideBySideExclusionRuleInterface.html).
The `isExcluded()` method receives a [`ContentInfo`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-ContentInfo.html) object, which gives you access to different criteria, including content type, section, owner, main language, publication status, visibility, and main location of the content item.
If the content item should be excluded, the method should return `true`.
```

Register the rule with the `ibexa.translations_management.side_by_side.exclusion_rule` tag.
This interface is not registered for [Symfony autoconfiguration]([[= symfony_doc =]]/service_container.html#the-autoconfigure-option), so the tag is required.

``` php
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/src/TranslationsManagement/MyCustomExclusionRule.php') =]]
```

> ``` yaml

Reviewer 3: It feels that some sentence with explanation is needed between two blocks of code - the php and yaml ones (plus they have different code language, so some "break" would be nice here).

[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 1, 1) =]]

> [[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 15, 27) =]]

Reviewer: The range for YAML code sample include is too broad

<img width="942" height="771" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/dfe03c9a-9fb6-4f05-8b17-6fd8dfe15c3c" />

```

### Exclude with existing class

`MyCustomExclusionRule` targets one specific content type by name.
To exclude any content type that contains specific field types without the need to write a custom class, register an additional instance of the built-in [`UnsupportedFieldTypeExclusionRule`](https://github.com/ibexa/translations-management/blob/main/src/lib/SideBySide/Service/UnsupportedFieldTypeExclusionRule.php).
Because this registers a second instance of the service with different arguments, you can't use the class name as the service ID.
Use an arbitrary string ID instead to avoid a service definition conflict:

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 1, 1) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 18, 23) =]]
```

## Use Twig component extension points

> Two [Twig component groups](custom_components.md#translations-management) allow you to inject custom UI elements into the translation interface without the need to override their templates.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Two [Twig component groups](custom_components.md#translations-management) allow you to inject custom UI elements into the translation interface without the need to override their templates.

```

Such custom elements could be:

- buttons that allow the editor to create a new translation either in the side-by-side view or the standard single-panel editor

> - a disclaimer or policy notice that the editor must acknowledge before a translation is created

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Such custom elements could be, for example, a disclaimer or policy notice that the editor must acknowledge before a translation is created.
```

> buttons that allow the editor to create a new translation either in the side-by-side view or the standard single-panel editor

This is already built-in into translations management?

> The two groups behave differently:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The two groups works differently:
```

Author: behave/behavior is ok

- `admin-ui-content-edit-translation-select-footer` — component output is inserted between the existing **Edit** and **Discard** buttons of the content edit confirmation screen.

Register a component with the `ibexa.twig.component` tag:

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 1, 1) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 24, 28) =]]
```

!!! note

    The `admin-ui-content-translation-modal-footer` group receives a `location` variable that may be `null` for an unpublished draft.
    Always check for `null` before you access location properties in your component template.

## Service tags reference

The following service tags expose additional extension points that you can use to customize and extend translations management behavior.

| Tag | Purpose | Required attributes |
|---|---|---|
| `ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider.language_normalizer` | Register a language code normalizer for a provider | none |
| `ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider.ai.translation_strategy` | Register a custom AI translation strategy (prompt structure) | `priority` |

> | `ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.metadata_validation.retry_policy` | Register a metadata validation retry policy | `priority` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
(section was not removed)

---
description: Extend translations management - add custom classes, exclude custom content types and intercept the flow.
edition: lts-update
month_change: true
---

# Extend translations management

By extending [Translations management](translations_management_guide.md), you can build custom translation workflows and adapt the package's behavior to your specific requirements.
The package is designed to be extended in multiple ways.
You can create custom [translation providers](configure_translations_management.md#configure-translation-providers), field type transformers, exclusion rules, and UI components.
In all cases, you follow the same pattern: implement an interface or extend a base class, then register the service with a service tag.
The package discovers and registers tagged services automatically.

> ## Add custom translation provider

Reviewer 4: We should distinguish regular translation provider from Ai translation provider. There are two different interfaces which allows to determine which provider will be added: 
- TranslationProviderInterface
- AiTranslationProviderInterface

```

If a field type requires metadata, for example, RichText fields with embedded objects that you must preserve after translation, implement [`MetadataAwareFieldValueTransformerInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Transformer-Field-MetadataAwareFieldValueTransformerInterface.html) instead.

## Define custom exclusion rules

Use exclusion rules to identify content types that cannot use the side-by-side view.
The Translations management package ships with one rule that excludes content types that contain `ibexa_landing_page` or `ibexa_form` fields.

### Exclude with custom class

To exclude additional content types, for example, content types whose fields render incorrectly in the side-by-side layout, implement [`SideBySideExclusionRuleInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-SideBySide-Service-SideBySideExclusionRuleInterface.html).
The `isExcluded()` method receives a [`ContentInfo`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-ContentInfo.html) object and returns `true` if the content item should be excluded.

> Classes that implement this interface are automatically tagged with `autoconfigure`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Register the rule with the `ibexa.translations_management.side_by_side.exclusion_rule` tag.
This interface is not registered for Symfony autoconfiguration, so the tag is required.
```

``` php
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/src/TranslationsManagement/MyCustomExclusionRule.php') =]]
```

> If `autoconfigure` is not available, register the tag explicitly:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

To intercept the "Add translation" action at the HTTP level, for example, to trigger auto-translation and redirect to a custom view, or to bypass the default flow entirely, subscribe to `admin-ui`'s `ContentProxyTranslateEvent`.

The `translations-management` package listens to this event at priority `100`.
Subscribe at a higher priority to act before the package does:

``` php hl_lines="35 36"
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/src/TranslationsManagement/ContentProxyTranslateSubscriber.php') =]]
```

Both highlighted calls are required:

- `setResponse()` alone does not prevent the Translations management listener at priority 100 from running and overwriting the response.
- `stopPropagation()` stops all lower-priority listeners from executing.

When a response is set on the event, `admin-ui` uses it and doesn't proceed with the standard translation editor.

!!! caution "Internal `ContentProxyTranslateEvent`"

    `ContentProxyTranslateEvent` is marked `@internal` in `ibexa/admin-ui`.
    While it functions as an extension point in practice, its name and signature may change.
    It may even be removed entirely without a deprecation notice.

> 

Reviewer 4: We could consider to be more precise here and clarify that when the package's Subscriber fails to create the auto-translated draft in this flow (for example, the provider is unreachable), it catches the error, shows an error notification, and redirects to the content view. It does not surface a full error page.

---
description: Extend translations management - add custom classes, exclude custom content types and intercept the flow.
edition: lts-update
month_change: true
---

# Extend translations management

By extending [Translations management](translations_management_guide.md), you can adapt the package's behavior to your specific requirements.
The package is designed to be extended in multiple ways.
You can create custom [translation providers](configure_translations_management.md#configure-translation-providers), field type transformers, exclusion rules, and UI components.
In all cases, you follow the same pattern: implement an interface first, then register the service with a service tag.
The package discovers and registers tagged services automatically.

## Add custom translation provider

> Before you build a custom translation provider, if your provider uses the AI Actions framework, make sure that the `ibexa/connector-ai` package is installed in your system.

Reviewer: AI is installed by default in v5 - should say "configured" most likely

### REST API-based provider

To connect a translation service that calls a REST API directly, implement [`TranslationProviderInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Provider-TranslationProviderInterface.html).

> The `translate()` method receives a `TranslationDataInterface` object that carries the text to translate along with the source and target language codes:

Reviewer: I'd link to PHP API for TranslationDataInterface

``` php hl_lines="36-49"
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/src/TranslationsManagement/MyCustomProvider.php') =]]
```

Register the provider with the `ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider` tag.
Both `identifier` and [`validation_profile`](#validation-profiles) are required attributes.

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 1, 6) =]]
```

### AI-based provider

To connect a translation service that uses the [AI Actions](ai_actions.md) framework, implement [`AiTranslationProviderInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Provider-AiTranslationProviderInterface.html).
The interface adds `getConfiguration()` and `isConfigured()` to the base provider contract.

> These methods allow the package to determine whether the provider is available before it displays  selectable options in the **Create a new translation** modal:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
These methods allow the package to determine whether the provider is available before it displays selectable options in the **Create a new translation** modal:
```

> ``` php hl_lines="37-50"

Reviewer: Shouldn't the highlight be on `getConfiguration()` and `isConfigured()`, the two new mthods?

[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/src/TranslationsManagement/MyCustomAiProvider.php') =]]
```

Register the provider with the `ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider` tag, with `ai_generic` as the validation profile.
The `ai_generic` validation profile is used by default for AI providers, but you can [implement your own](#validation-profiles).

``` yaml

> [[= include_file('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 0, 1) =]] [[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 32, 36) =]]

Reviewer: AI detects this code sample as broken, as the MkDocs build is broken I was not able to verify this - please have a look:

```
Broken YAML sample — extend_translations_management.md:49 puts two macros on one line:
[[= include_file(..., 0, 1) =]] [[= include_code(..., 32, 36) =]]
The space between them renders as:
services:
     App\TranslationsManagement\MyCustomAiProvider:   # 5 spaces, not 4
```

```

!!! note "Minimal `getConfiguration()` and `isConfigured()` implementations"

    The sample implements `getConfiguration()` and `isConfigured()` as stubs.
    The built-in AI providers delegate these methods to internal services that are not part of the public API and are not available to custom code outside the bundle.

>     If your custom provider integrates with the AI Actions framework, `isConfigured()` should check whether the `actionConfigurationIdentifier` resolves to an existing and enabled Action Configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your custom provider integrates with the AI Actions framework, `isConfigured()` should check whether the `actionConfigurationIdentifier` resolves to an existing and enabled Action Configuration.
```

I think this can be simplified - built-in providers use classes outside of `Ibexa\Constracts`, so imho it's obvious they are not for reuse, and that the code samples are just stubs.

The `validation_profile`, `supportedLanguageCodes`, and `languageCodesMap` options work the same way as for REST API-based providers.

### Validation profiles

> The `validation_profile` attribute links the provider to a validator that checks language codes and payload size before each before each translation request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `validation_profile` attribute links the provider to a validator that checks language codes and payload size before each translation request.
```

By default, three profiles are available:

| Profile | Used by |
|---|---|
| `google` | Google Translate provider |
| `deepl` | DeepL provider |
| `ai_generic` | All built-in AI providers. Suitable for custom AI providers. |

To define a custom validation profile, implement [`ProviderValidatorInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Validator-ProviderValidatorInterface.html) and register it:

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 1, 1) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 7, 10) =]]
```

> You can extend [`DefaultProviderValidator`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Validator-DefaultProviderValidator.html) as base class.

Reviewer 4: The class `DefaultProviderValidator` is marked as final which means that is not extendable and cannot be used as a base class. It can still be reused when defining own provider validator.

> You can extend [`DefaultProviderValidator`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Validator-DefaultProviderValidator.html) as base class.

Author: ```suggestion
You can reuse the [`DefaultProviderValidator`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Validator-DefaultProviderValidator.html) class if it meets your requirements or implement your own..
```

> You can reuse the [`DefaultProviderValidator`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Validator-DefaultProviderValidator.html) class if it meets your requirements or implement your own..

Author: ```suggestion
You can reuse the [`DefaultProviderValidator`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Validator-DefaultProviderValidator.html) class if it meets your requirements or implement your own.
```

It exposes configurable maximum payload size and language code regex patterns.

The package also provides several specialized interfaces for providers with specific requirements:

| Interface | Purpose |
|---|---|

> | [`ConfigurableProviderInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Provider-ConfigurableProviderInterface.html) | Extends `TranslationProviderInterface`. Adds `getConfiguration()` and `isConfigured()` for providers that store API keys and other settings |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| [`ConfigurableProviderInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Provider-ConfigurableProviderInterface.html) | Extends `TranslationProviderInterface`. Adds `getConfiguration()` and `isConfigured()` for providers that store API keys and other required settings |
```

| [`AiTranslationProviderInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Provider-AiTranslationProviderInterface.html) | Extends `ConfigurableProviderInterface`. Used as a type marker for AI-based providers, it inherits the configuration methods |

> | [`TranslationHttpClientInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Http-TranslationHttpClientInterface.html) | For HTTP-based providers that use a REST API pattern |

Reviewer: This part does not belong to the "Validation profiles" section, it feels more like an introduction to available interfaces before you add your custom provider.

It mentions (again) `AiTranslationProviderInterface` and calls it a marker interface (which is important).

It could be moved to the "Add custom translation provider" section

> | [`TranslationHttpClientInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Http-TranslationHttpClientInterface.html) | For HTTP-based providers that use a REST API pattern |

Reviewer: I don't understand what "For HTTP-based providers that use a REST API pattern" means, why/when would I use it?

The code sample itself for the REST API based provider has a stub `MyApiClient`, but it doesn't use `TranslationHttpClientInterface`, so it's ok to skip it?

## Add support for custom field types

The translation engine works by extracting translatable text from fields, sending it to the provider, and writing the translated text back.
Field value transformers handle this encode/decode cycle, one per field type.

> The package includes transformers for standard text and RichText fields.

Reviewer: There's also `LandingPageFieldValueTransformer`.

BTW, looking at https://github.com/ibexa/translations-management/pull/161 , perhaps translating landing pages is actually supported?

- `encode(Field $field): EncodedFieldValue` - extracts the translatable string from the field and wraps it in an [`EncodedFieldValue`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Transformer-Field-EncodedFieldValue.html).
The constructor takes the extracted string as its first argument and an optional metadata array as the second.
- `decode(string $value, mixed $previousFieldValue, array $metadata): Value` - receives the translated string, the previous field value, and any metadata. Returns the updated field value.

``` php hl_lines="21 31 37 46-58"
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/src/TranslationsManagement/ImageAltTextTransformer.php') =]]
```

Register the new transformer with the `ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.field_value_transformer` tag.
The `field_type_identifier` attribute is required.
It must match the value that `getFieldTypeIdentifier()` returns:

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 1, 1) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 14, 17) =]]
```

> If a field type requires metadata, for example, RichText fields with embedded objects that you must preserve after translation, implement [`MetadataAwareFieldValueTransformerInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Transformer-Field-MetadataAwareFieldValueTransformerInterface.html) instead.

Reviewer: This is definitely for a follow-up, as we don't need it on day one, but it's not clear how to use this interface.

I had the following conversation with AI:

```
1. You don't need this interface to use metadata. The base FieldValueTransformerInterface already does the full round-trip: encode() returns EncodedFieldValue(string $value, array $metadata = []) and decode(string $value, mixed $previousFieldValue, array $metadata) receives it. A transformer that "requires metadata … to preserve embedded objects" works fine on the plain interface. The premise of the sentence is false.
```

You mention the above in this PR already (line 98)

Author: This class has the following methods:
isMetadataRequired
publichandleMetadataEncodingFailure
We could say something along the lines of:
"If you need to discard (retry? react consciously to?) the translation that failed to process metadata, use MetadataAwareFieldValueTransformerInterface.

Author: I am actually replacing the paragraph with a note to that effect.

## Define custom exclusion rules

> Use exclusion rules to identify content types that cannot use the side-by-side view.

Reviewer: Nitpick: the way how the rules are designed, you can probably exclude not only based on content types, but also locations, owner, sections etc.

https://doc.ibexa.co/en/5.0/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-ContentInfo.html#methods gives you access to a lot of properties

### Exclude with custom class

To exclude additional content types, for example, content types whose fields render incorrectly in the side-by-side layout, implement [`SideBySideExclusionRuleInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-SideBySide-Service-SideBySideExclusionRuleInterface.html).
The `isExcluded()` method receives a [`ContentInfo`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-ContentInfo.html) object and returns `true` if the content item should be excluded.
Register the rule with the `ibexa.translations_management.side_by_side.exclusion_rule` tag.
This interface is not registered for Symfony autoconfiguration, so the tag is required.

``` php
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/src/TranslationsManagement/MyCustomExclusionRule.php') =]]
```

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 1, 1) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 18, 20) =]]
```

### Exclude with existing class

`MyCustomExclusionRule` targets one specific content type by name.

> To exclude any content type that contain specific field types without the need to write a custom class, register an additional instance of the built-in [`UnsupportedFieldTypeExclusionRule`](https://github.com/ibexa/translations-management/blob/main/src/lib/SideBySide/Service/UnsupportedFieldTypeExclusionRule.php).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To exclude any content type that contains specific field types without the need to write a custom class, register an additional instance of the built-in [`UnsupportedFieldTypeExclusionRule`](https://github.com/ibexa/translations-management/blob/main/src/lib/SideBySide/Service/UnsupportedFieldTypeExclusionRule.php).
```

Because this registers a second instance of the service with different arguments, you can't use the class name as the service ID.
Use an arbitrary string ID instead to avoid a service definition conflict:

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 1, 1) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 21, 26) =]]
```

> ## Use Twig component extension points

Reviewer: Please add a link to https://doc.ibexa.co/en/5.0/templating/components/ somewhere in this section

Two Twig component groups allow you to inject custom UI elements into the translation interface without the need to override their templates.
Such custom elements could be:

- buttons that allow the editor to create a new translation either in the side-by-side view or the standard single-panel editor
- a disclaimer or policy notice that the editor must acknowledge before a translation is created

> | Component group | Location | Variables available |

Reviewer: I'd add the groups to https://doc.ibexa.co/en/5.0/administration/back_office/back_office_elements/custom_components/ , and make them a link to here

|---|---|---|
| `admin-ui-content-translation-modal-footer` | Footer of the **Add translation** modal | `form`, `content_id`, `location`, `allow_placeholder` |

> | `admin-ui-content-edit-translation-select-footer` | Footer of the **Select translation** panel on the content edit screen | `form`, `content_id`, `main_language_code` |

Reviewer: To be honest, without the screenshots I can't tell where these groups are - the recommended way to find them is to look at the Symfony Profiler integration (see the linked article).

And I wouldn't say that the screenshot below is in the "content edit screen" already

<img width="1492" height="825" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/baf8a277-59ab-4a88-b9fd-204ce2c01ac1" />

The two groups behave differently:

- `admin-ui-content-translation-modal-footer` — if any of the components renders output that is not empty, it entirely replaces the default footer buttons.
Your component template must therefore include its own action buttons.
- `admin-ui-content-edit-translation-select-footer` — component output is inserted between the existing **Edit** and **Discard** buttons.

Register a component with the `ibexa.twig.component` tag:

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 1, 1) =]]
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 27, 31) =]]
```

!!! note

>     The `admin-ui-content-translation-modal-footer` group receives a `location` variable that may be `null` when the modal is rendered outside a location context.

Reviewer: > the modal is rendered outside a location context.

Can we say it's "for an unpublished draft"?

"Rendering `admin-ui-content-translation-modal-footer` outside of location context" isn't that clear.

    Always check for `null` before you access location properties in your component template.

> ## Intercept translation flow

Reviewer: In general, I don't understand the purpose of this section.

We're documenting an internal event that shouldn't be used by Partners.
This event exists (as internal) for [5 years already](https://github.com/ezsystems/ezplatform-admin-ui/pull/1714/changes#diff-713ac35fe159857b3b96bb9cabd6d5818c7989a475700f64fcf2cde189b08a41), why are we adding describing it now?

> To intercept the "Add translation" action at the HTTP level, for example, to trigger auto-translation and redirect to a custom view, or to bypass the default flow entirely, subscribe to `admin-ui`'s `ContentProxyTranslateEvent`.

The `for example, to trigger auto-translation and redirect to a custom view` part sounds as if someone were to reimplement the Translation Management by himself, can we find a better use case to justify this?

The automated translation subscriber fires only when a special "translationProvider" param is selected, I'm not sure we should recommend overwriting all of this.

The `BeforeTranslateEvent` and `TranslateEvent` [events](translations_management_events.md#translation-events) operate at the field-value level and cannot redirect the HTTP flow.
To intercept the "Add translation" action at the HTTP level, for example, to trigger auto-translation and redirect to a custom view, or to bypass the default flow entirely, subscribe to `admin-ui`'s `ContentProxyTranslateEvent`.

The `translations-management` package listens to this event at priority `100`.
Subscribe at a higher priority to act before the package does:

``` php hl_lines="22 38 39"
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/src/TranslationsManagement/ContentProxyTranslateSubscriber.php') =]]
```

Both highlighted calls are required:

- `setResponse()` alone does not prevent the Translations management listener at priority 100 from running and overwriting the response.
- `stopPropagation()` stops all lower-priority listeners from executing.

> When a response is set on the event, `admin-ui` uses it and doesn't proceed with the standard translation editor.

Reviewer: > When a response is set on the event, `admin-ui` uses it and doesn't proceed with the standard translation editor.

Doesn't proceed with the standard translation editor, but also doesn't proceed with the site-by-side editor?

Once you call `stopPropagation` and `setResponse` you're in full control what happens

> When the package's Subscriber fails to create the auto-translated draft, for example, when the provider is unreachable, it catches the exception, shows an error notification in the back office, and redirects the editor to the content view, but it does not surface a full error page.

Reviewer: This sentence has nothing to do with intercepting the HTTP flow? If you create your own subscriber with higher priority than translations management's one, the package's subscriber actions are not executed and don't matter?'

If your subscriber takes over the flow by calling both `setResponse()` and `stopPropagation()`, you must implement error handling.

!!! caution "Internal `ContentProxyTranslateEvent`"

    `ContentProxyTranslateEvent` is marked `@internal` in `ibexa/admin-ui`.
    While it functions as an extension point in practice, its name and signature may change.
    It may even be removed entirely without a deprecation notice.

## Service tags reference

The following service tags expose additional extension points that you can use to customize and extend translations management behavior.

| Tag | Purpose | Required attributes |
|---|---|---|
| `ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider.language_normalizer` | Register a language code normalizer for a provider | none |
| `ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider.ai.translation_strategy` | Register a custom AI translation strategy (prompt structure) | `priority` |

> | `ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.metadata_validation.retry_policy` | Register a metadata validation retry policy | `priority` |

Reviewer: All of these deserve they own examples - a custom `language_normalizer` can be part of a custom provider, a `retry_policy` can be a part of a custom field encoder, and `AiTranslationStrategyInterface` sounds like a part of implemeitng a custom AI provider based on AI Actions.

Author: I am removing this section.

Additionally, I am adding a sample for the language code normalizer, skipping translation_strategy, because the class is in https://github.com/ibexa/translations-management/tree/5.0/src/lib/AutoTranslate/Ai, not in contracts, and skipping retry_policy because I don't know how to approach it.

---
description: Extend translations management - add custom classes, exclude custom content types and intercept the flow.
edition: lts-update
month_change: true
---

# Extend translations management

> By extending [Translations management](translations_management_guide.md), you can build custom translation workflows and adapt the package's behavior to your specific requirements.

Reviewer 4: For me "you can build custom translation workflows" sounds very suspicious. Translations workflow is one for each providers and any attempts to customized workflow is a potential crash.

``` php hl_lines="36-49"
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/src/TranslationsManagement/MyCustomProvider.php') =]]
```

Register the provider with the `ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider` tag.
Both `identifier` and [`validation_profile`](#validation-profiles) are required attributes.

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 1, 6) =]]
```

### AI-based provider

To connect a translation service that uses the [AI Actions](ai_actions.md) framework, implement [`AiTranslationProviderInterface`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-TranslationsManagement-AutoTranslate-Provider-AiTranslationProviderInterface.html).
The interface adds `getConfiguration()` and `isConfigured()` to the base provider contract.
These methods allow the package to determine whether the provider is available before it displays  selectable options in the **Create a new translation** modal:

``` php hl_lines="37-50"
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/src/TranslationsManagement/MyCustomAiProvider.php') =]]
```

> Register the provider with the `ibexa.translations_management.auto_translate.provider` tag, with `ai_generic` as the validation profile:

Reviewer 4: Maybe worth to mention that devs can implement their own validation profiles for AI but ai_generic is default across all supported connectors. I see below section about this so we can link them.

The `isExcluded()` method receives a [`ContentInfo`](/api/php_api/php_api_reference/classes/Ibexa-Contracts-Core-Repository-Values-Content-ContentInfo.html) object, which gives you access to different criteria, including content type, section, owner, main language, publication status, visibility, and main location of the content item.
If the content item should be excluded, the method should return `true`.

``` php
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/src/TranslationsManagement/MyCustomExclusionRule.php') =]]
```

Register the rule with the `ibexa.translations_management.side_by_side.exclusion_rule` tag.
This interface is not registered for [Symfony autoconfiguration]([[= symfony_doc =]]/service_container.html#the-autoconfigure-option), so the tag is required.

``` yaml
[[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 1, 1) =]]

> [[= include_code('code_samples/translations_management/config/services.yaml', 15, 23) =]]

Reviewer: <img width="947" height="317" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3412039e-ab1f-4df5-b2a5-31a28cf81b44" />

It's still showing too much, it includes the "Exlude with existing class" code sample
